# OSGLS
An model for open source global legislation system. Some shortcomings are listed for possible future resolution. 



Can We Fork the State?                                                                                            A Thought Experiment of Open Source Global Legislating
Nathalie Mezza-Garcia1, 
1 Centre for Interdisciplinary Methodologies,
University of Warwick 
n.mezza-garcia@warwick.ac.uk
Abstract. This document discusses the extrapolation of global collaboration, direct contributions, interactive information processing, and forking, as practices of open source, to a global legislative framework. By means of a thought experiment I study the implications of legislating globally based on the political principles of open source in a scenario where instead of political representatives making decisions inside chambers these emerged in open source environments. The findings help the generation of theories around open legislative practices in a future global government as well as direct mechanisms of decision-making in a world where the dividing line between citizens and governors seem to be shrinking. I conclude with important remarks about the dynamics of open source communities outside of the software production environment.	           
Keywords: open source, global governance, legislation, complexity, online colonialism, forking.

1  INTRODUCTION It is unclear to me why the average citizen still believes that changing governors and the clockwork of nation-states will ever produce a desired outcome. Hierarchical power based on political representation in contemporary nation-states relies on wars, violence and economic inequalities, since these were some of the main pillars upon which modern states were founded (Giddens, 1985). From a topological perspective and excluding tribal societies, every political systems that have governed human societies at a large scale and for long periods of time in the last two and a half thousand years (Monarchies, theocracies, aristocracies, dictatorships and democracies) has had pyramidal, hierarchical, closed and centralized structures, called in graph theory as tree topologies (Mezza-Garcia N. , 2013). Therefore, we have had two millennia of divisions between decision-makers and the rest of individuals with less influential political power capacities. As the world becomes increasingly interconnected, it should be easier to overcome this rudimentary topology of power. We are at a stage where we should be embracing other forms of political participation not based on elections and periodic votes that only reinforce two and a half thousand years of hierarchies. Due to their extensive nature, internet-based technologies have the potential to be key in what I expect is a future radical shift in politics. In an ideal version of this scenario, politics would experience the same transformations that took place in software environments with the arrival of open source, a partial decentralisation of decision-making. Indeed, open source software and open source communities “provide an early perspective on the institutional, political, and economic consequences for human societies of the telecommunications and internet revolutions” (Weber, 2004, pág. 2). 
In line with the inevitability of not placing hopes in the internet and specific internet-based technologies, (Rushkoff, 2003) proposed the notion of open source democracy, claiming that “the implementation of an open source democracy will require us to dig deep into the very code of our legislative processes, and then to rebirth it in the new context of our networked reality” (Rushkoff, 2003, p. 57). I assume Rushkoff approached open source technologies based partly on a well-intended aim of reducing the negative impact of top-down and hierarchical topologies in governance systems. As the author himself claimed, “it might not be too late for a globalism model of cooperation instead of competition, and on organic interchange instead of financial transaction (Rushkoff, 2003, pág. 47)”. Given how open source communities manage to generate organised patterns of software with just direct and small individual contributions, I understand why open source is a good reference point when addressing problems of openness, governance, democracy, legislation and technology-driven political participation. Therefore, in this document I take Douglas Rushkoff´s suggestion of legislating based on the principles of open source further and I present how would legislating via open source be if we extrapolated the most important principles of open source software making and general aspects of its community dynamics to a strictly political arena. 
Open source is increasingly becoming more and more popular even outside of a software framework. Ten years ago there was still a strict emphasis on avoiding and even prohibiting citations coming from Wikipedia articles in academic works. Nowadays doing it is close to a political statement of progress and decentralisation of knowledge and against traditional power structures in society . Although Wikipedia is still not completely accepted as a valid source of knowledge in many academic and non-academic spaces, it is impossible to deny the contributions it has made regarding access to information and knowledge. Whether someone wants to know about the emergence of the Samurai during the Kamakura period in XIIth Century Japan, about the relation between green anarchism and the Animal Liberation Front or about various forms of eusocial behaviours in bee colonies, Wikipedia makes it possible for anybody with internet access. As a mechanism of democratisation of information Wikipedia works extremely well. But it is not the only successful collaborative open source result that surprises for its open nature and functionality. Other open source projects such as Linux and Firefox have also produced marvellous results in terms of collective work, participation and transparency; three concepts that have gained more importance in the governance lexicon of recent years, as reflected in the book by Daniel Lathrop and Laurel Ruma (Lathrop & Ruma, 2010). 
At first glance, the decentralised organisation of open source and its community dynamics makes it very tempting to look at it as a milestone embodiment of grand scale collaboration worldwide. This task was already carried on by Steven Weber (Weber, 2004) who wrote in his book entitled `The Success of Open Source´ which were the main achievements of open source projects. Weber highlighting how open source managed to achieve what in other strictly political contexts had not been possible: to blur the geographical, language, cultural and corporate principles usually needed to build complex sophisticated software, without necessarily economic interests driving the projects. Yet, the measurement attributed to the success of open source sometimes comes from the fact that it is increasingly used by big corporations such as Google, Yahoo, Pixar, Disney, Dreamworks and Apple, ands well as government agencies like the National Security Agency –NSA- in the United States, as mentioned also by the author. Nevertheless, the branding of open source as a democratisation of knowledge-building simply makes it so attractive that somehow pushes to a side the fact that one of the biggest government surveillance entities in the world uses open source in its benefit. Thus, the focus is usually placed on the expectations placed upon its decentralised communities rather than on the economic and political hierarchies it is linked to.   
To be sure, the first thought that occurred to me previous to this thought experiment was that globally legislating based on the principles of open source could peacefully decrease the economic polarisation of human societies, as it would involve more individuals in rule-making practices in a human community. That is, that maybe it could open the door for a completely horizontal or at least heterarchical way of doing politics and decision-making. At this point I can easily picture a world where the competition for power does not translate into wars nor violent political revolutions, and I support this idea on the view by Douglas Rushkoff regarding how revolutions take place today. According to the him, in this era where politics meets the internet, revolutionary transformations in politics are coming more and more from an interplay between governments and citizens, rather than by groups of individuals external to governments trying to overthrow them (Rushkoff, 2003). If this statement is true, then we are seeing the first glimpses of a more democratic world where internet-based technologies finally will make possible direct political participation in a more sophisticated form of democracy compared to one founded on political parties, representatives and hierarchies. Or even more elegantly, on a techno-anarchy. Therefore, it is my intention with this document to conjecture what would legislating à la open source entail and how could the principles of open source be applied to how we make rules in human society. In order to do so, I resort to a thought experiment to where I discuss the functioning and implications of implementing the idea proposed by Rushkoff, with the expectance that an open source coding of decision-making could be a first step into the next generation of dynamics of sociopolitical organisation, where voting, representation, representatives and political parties are replaced by knowledge-based instead of popularity-based systems. By the end of the document I provide a clear vision on the consequences of paralleling in a literal way the transformations taking place in software communities, to politics. As an anarchist scholar and supporter of decentralised and distributed decision-making processes, it is my intention to find if open source can catalyse a phase transition from closed, hierarchical and centralised decision-making to a more equalitarian, open and networked way of doing politics and, ultimately, organising the world. Hitherto, the background aim of the thought experiment is to reflect on a legislative practice that could replace legislation by means of politicians and representatives in order to extend the notion of democracy to a more open and participatory form. 
I acknowledge that we already have many of the technologies needed to generate direct involvement in decision-making. For example, by means of programing solutions to local and global problems as well as discussing controversial issues online in a parallel, distributed and decentralised way from the comfort of our own homes. These two characteristics, programing automatic systems in societies and online controversy solving are the two fundamental pillars of open source in which I base this thought experiment. In the language of this technology, the aim of this document is to see if we could fork current protocols of law-making of nation-states, as a first attempt into creating a global government with rule-making practices that fit this digital era. Following this introduction, in the second section of this paper I present a brief description of open source and introduce a model I have called Open Source Global Legislation System (OSGLS). I then discuss the context in which the model arises and explain the methodology followed throughout the document. In the third section I select general properties of open source projects and apply them to the OSGLS model. In the fourth section I answer the question of whether nation-states can be forked in the same way in which open source projects are forked today and then follow with possible undesirable implications of legislating via open source. Lastly, I conclude with some wrapping up comments and remarks. 
2 THE OPEN SOURCE GLOBAL LEGISLATION SYSTEM AS THE METHODOLOGY AND MODEL
As a starting point I would like to highlight the democratic implications of the participative and collaborative nature of open source environments, in which individuals directly participate in the decision-making processes of a collaboratively constructed project. When compared to the traditional decision-making capacities of average citizens in a political context –whether it is at a local, national or global scale- it seems that open source generates more active and effective democratic participation than in openly democratic practices where individual participation is limited to a vote. This is why it is very appealing to contemplate a world where decision-making is based on similar horizontal community structures similar to those of open source projects, which seem less bureaucratic than top-down political structures of the offline world. Although every open source project is different, I have extracted some general political principles common to all of them, that ultimately guide the way power is distributed, conflicts are solved, controversies are approached, decisions are made and sanctioning is executed. These are: global participation, a mixture between online and offline dynamics, direct contributions, incompleteness in open-ended environments and forking. 
With the north of a more decentralised, open and directly democratic world in mind, the question that leads the discussion throughout the document is how can the open source framework be used for legislating at a global scale, assuming that, as (Castells, 2015) claimed, we are heading towards a global networked civilisation. In this thought experiment the community structures, politics and general principles in open source projects are used as the suitable environment to code the automatization of technical aspects of living in a global society and for solving controversies regarding those procedures, without the need for central coordination. Therefore, there is a human and also an algorithmic component in this model of OSGLS, which I have defined as a decentralised, open and heterarchical dynamic of decision-making for a frontierless, onlife and complex world that uses the principles and platforms of open source for making decisions related to problems of the commons, at a local community or biosphere level in the medium term future of humanity. This is done by means of controversy solving in online forums, programing technical aspects of living in communities via open source platforms and, most importantly, making decisions for organising human social systems in a self-organised and community-based way, always trying to seek a harmonic coevolution of biological species and artificial systems affected by the regulations. That is, OSGLS is a model for creating rules of a society and automatizing technical systems in public spaces in a world where the political aspect of nation-states has been replaced for a more factual local or urban settlement-based dimension of human life. 
One of the advantages I see in implementing such model is that it could end up being as transparent as a decision-making system can be. At least that is what I will expect to find by the end of the experiment. I believe at this point that open source would make that possible, since every conversation, every decision-made would is expected to be public. As Karl Fogel said, private conversations in open source should be avoided, since “no serious contributor would stick around for long in an environment where a secret council makes all the big decisions” (Fogel, Producing Open Source Software. How to Run a Successful Free Software Project, 2015). Fogel and the transparency spirit behind open source projects cannot be wrong: there are no reasons for why individuals who are participating in a community should be excluded from how those decisions are made. It is a better way to approach problems, and the online nature of open source creates a good space for generating transparent decisions. In order to guarantee this transparency, the OSGLS would be backed-up by mechanisms based on raw data gathered from devices connected to the Internet of Things. In that way whenever there is a controversy that needs be solved, the information that the model would work with would be as objective as possible. The reason being that these back-up mechanisms could feed from information coming from the Internet of Things. And since big data provides a clearer understanding of human societies, much better than what polls, surveys and referendums can today, this in principle would make the information the OSGLS uses be as objective as possible. Or wouldn’t ‘it?... As a first assessment of the beginning of this thought experiment, I cannot help think that it is simply a very big assumption to believe that information is neutral, no matter the sources. Additionally, it is also a big jump to expect every individual to be or want to be connected to the internet, that they will join the quantified self trend or that the participation in the Internet of Things will be equal and, therefore, will actually provide accurate insights into the world. Or that every individual will live in a smart city where technical aspects can be automatized. But, most importantly, that even at a large statistical level things can provide an accurate picture of individuals and their own personal identities. 
Despite the previous setbacks, there are other aspects of the model that make it more effective after taking that information and it is that one arm of its foundations will consist on implementing simulations that with the use of evolutionary algorithms test thousands or millions of possible outcomes previously to decisions being imposed on the real world. These simulations would compute collecting as much data as possible and would involve agent-based simulations -see: (Bonabeau, 2002)-, metaheuristics –see: (Talbi, 2009)- and deep learning –see (Schmidhuber, 2015)- component, in order to attain the best decision possible in that moment in time. This would avoid possible negative casualties of unforeseen consequences. The reason is that the computational power of microelectronics-based machines is higher today than the one that can be attained by groups of humans deliberating in closed environments; inside congresses and parliaments. Thus, the space of exploration of solutions to a problem could be greater if resorting to networks of computers than humans. If so, it could be that OSGLS could help reduce the negative impact of political, economical, ideological, popularity, religious, party, power and individual interests that mediates discussions in human politics still. If the application of this model works, then we would avoid situations common to contemporary political decision-making where daily politics and governments go hand by hand with economic seeking to groups monopolise the economic outcomes of national policies. Consequently, the OSGLS could guarantee solutions as decentralized as possible if separating itself as possible from the human factor.  
This is not the first time where internet-based technologies have been used to address aspects of governance while seeking to open, decentralise and democratise political participation. Douglas Rushkoff (Rushkoff, 2003) spoke about a networked democracy, where participation in internet forums could enhance democratic practices; Matthew Burton (Burton, 2010) proposed that governments should have their own corps of coders, just as they now have peace corps; and Douglas Schuler described the example of e-liberating (Schuler, 2010), an online platform for deliberating that still presents many of the shortcomings of deliberating in person, like the need for a quorum. In general, today governments are increasingly using internet-based technologies to provide their services, at the same time that citizens are getting more involved in decision-making processes. At least more visibly and directly than before the popularisation of the web. The Open Government Declaration makes this fact more evident by citing in its first article the acknowledgement that “people around the world are demanding more openness in government. They are calling for greater civic participation in public affairs, and seeking ways to make their governments more transparent, responsive, accountable, and effective” (Partnership, 2011). 
We can also name some significant political cases where internet platforms and internet-based technologies were used to organise offline practices. For instance, the Finish Equal Marriage Law (Heikka, The Rise of the Mediating Citizen: Time, Space, and Citizenship in the Crowdsourcing of Finnish Legislation, 2015) where a policy was crowdsourced and the document written in Google Docs; the emergency service in San Francisco used by citizens to report cases of “abandoned vehicles, graffiti, illegal postings, street or sidewalk cleaning, streetlight, park issue, blocked sidewalk or space, damaged public property,” etc. (Council, s.f.); and the Arab Spring, which self-organised via twitter and Facebook. This `new´type of relations between citisens and governors led to the development of concepts such as `Government as a Platform´ (O´Reilly, 2010) or a `New Renaissance´ (Rushkoff, 2003). However, it might be important to look closely at how much citizens are actually empowered in these practices that, ultimately, only provide inputs to decision-making and legislative processes but not a peaceful way of influencing directly a decision outcome. They just do so in a much fashionable way, covered by the umbrella of inclusion and horizontality by means of inputting via technology, and where, despite the progressive intention of the previous examples, the final decision still relies exclusively on individuals who are directly part of the political regime. Not only that, the mediation of big corporations such as Google in the case of the Finish crowdsourced law, the local government of San Francisco in the second case or the emergence of 1.000 new Sadam Huseins (Bearak, 2016) post-Arab-Spring raises the question of how different these practices are from the previous state of affairs or if they simply form and embody an evolved reproduction. The strongest critique probably is that rule (law) making based on political representation continues to be the last instance of decision-making even with the use of collaborative and more `democratic´ practices generating at first instance on the internet. In the case of the Arab Spring, for example, this shortcoming is very evident, since dictators and leaders were overthrown only to be replaced by others with their same positional advantages. Therefore, it appears that independently of how open the design of the new internet-based political tools and practices seem to be, they still rely on the figure of politicians and representatives as strongly as before the internet. And that the role of inputs coming from the citizens and the environment are just that, inputs, instead of active interaction with decision-making processes. 
The latter situation makes it clear that no matter how many software and services offered today by governments point towards openness, use open platforms or come from citizen initiatives, governments will never be open unless individuals have direct involvement and action in every stage of the decision-making and law-making process. This critique led me to see in the OSGLS a model for a possible true direct and horizontal political participation in the making of the laws that rule a human community. Especially because  open source is among this group of internet-based tools that generate collective results from small independent individual actions, which means that it could be a virtuous exponent of the wisdom of the crowds. Indeed, one reason for its success might be what Eric Raymond explains in The Cathedral and the Bazaar when he refers to the higher probabilities there are for attaining better solutions to a problem when consulting large pools of non-experts in comparison to resorting to a small group of experts (Raymond, 1999). In the following section I will discuss the specifics of the OSGLS model and what extempore could make it different from the previously mentioned cases by not falling into the same illusion of horizontality and direct democratic practice. 
Legislation, for instance, is still an exclusive club practice in contemporary (representative) democracies, even if now there are increasingly more sources of inputs before the computation of a decision starts. Legislating in contemporary representative democracies is an exercise involving deliberation and decision-making among a restricted group of individuals chosen based on elections and voting; popularity and influence. It embodies hierarchies and their disadvantages in their most tyrannical form. Nevertheless, it continues to be the core marrow procedure for rule-making in contemporary democratic societies since it is the formula by means of which the rules of interaction in a human social system are defined. For this additional reason I have chosen it as the centre of the model. Legislating via an OSGLS would mean a step further in current Government 2.0 tendencies, which focus on increase transparency, participation and collaboration, but are still far from direct political participation in decision-making. With what could be framed as naïve I support at this point the following claim by Weber: “open source software is the epitome of a non-excludable club good, because no one is prevented from consuming it. It is also entirely non-rival in the sense that any number of users can download and run a piece of software without decreasing the supply that remains for others” (Weber, 2004, pág. 151). Indeed, the strength of centralised and closed political systems today relies on the false premise that openness exists; (Tkacz, Wikipedia and the Politics of Openess, 2015) already criticised this aspect in a particular open source project, Wikipedia. While it is true that information became more open and accessible with Wikipedia and other open source projects, I wonder if this is enough to sustain that if we apply open source political principles to governance (and legislating in particular) it will automatically become truly open, inclusive and flexible. 
It is worth closing this section by mentioning that there have been, indeed, advances in the real world in terms of extending extend political participation beyond voting and seeking to make governance more transparent and seeking to democratise collaboration. However, from a critical point of view the Government 2.0 (Chun, Shulman, Sandoval, & Hovy, 2010) trend that frames the contemporary perspectives on the subject still remains short. Increased participation, transparency and collaboration do not necessarily translate in better possibilities to explore the hyperastronomical number of solutions a problem has. In other words, transparency, accountability and public data could create better representatives; individuals who are less focused on political benefits and more on making the world a better place. Yet, it is very naïve to stress that transparency, accountability and information publicly available are sufficient to do that jump and generate better decisions and rules in a completely democratic world.
3 MAKING OPENESS POSSIBLE VIA INTERACTION
Human societies are complex systems (Keith Sawyer, 2005), which means that they  unpredictable, nonlinear and decentralised (REF). Due to the high number of elements and diversity of interactions in human societies it is very hard to trace direct cause effect correlations emerging from their interactions when taken in isolation. That is, human social systems must be approached almost holistically and without the disacknowledgement of the underlying networks that compose them. However, it is very important to know that it is impossible to know in every moment of time what is occurring in a social system –or any other complex system in general. At best, we can have an approximate statistical measurement. The complexity of human social systems comes from the high number of elements in them and the nonlinearity in which these interact among them and with their environments -which dues to human societies being open systems. Openness in the context of complex systems refers to the way in which open systems process information, studied in computer science under the  name of Interactive Computation (Dodig-Crnkovic & Burgin, 2011).
Interactiveness is a paradigm in computer science that explains computational dynamics in open systems; systems that process information in an interactive way are incomplete, history-dependent, open and multiscalar. The relation between interactiveness and openness is clear; interactive computation is, by definition, performed by N agents in a decentralised, open, bottom-up, adaptive and asynchronous and incomplete way, in parallel or asynchronous time (Wegner, 1998). These characteristics describe so truthfully information processing in human social systems that it would be ideal to have dynamics of political organisation in human societies that would parallel their natural behaviour. (Burgin & Dodig-Crnkovic, 2012) already suggested a similar direction when they explored the open-ended nature of access to knowledge via the internet, and how it entailed more expressive and possibilities regarding computation from traditional closed systems. It is for this reason that I have turned to interactive computation as the descriptive mechanism that I wish to attain by focusing on open source to as the way for legislation to take place in a global human civilisation. 
Interaction also plays a formal role and the link between the behaviour of complex systems that self-organise and the self-organised human society I wish to attain, as it provides the link between self-organisation, biology, human social systems, artificial intelligences and automatised algorithms. Open source, I conjecture -and expect-, could be the medium to make this possible. Perhaps an OSGLS could guide the creation of rules in a human social system following their own natural interaction dynamics, rather than artificially imposing upon them top-down power, rules and control by means of a government. This document is an exercise in the direction of finding out whether open source dynamics can guide the self-organisation of human social systems, in the quest for a world that needs no use centralised control (Mezza-Garcia N. , Self-Organized Sociopolitical Interactions as the Best Way to Achieve Organized Patterns in Human Social Systems: Going beyond the Top-Down Control of Classical Political Regimes, 2013).  
One aspects that makes Interactive computing full of possibilities in a political context is that in an open computation any agent can intervene at any point. This would signify a profound advance compared to contemporary legislative bodies, which create rules with limited direct intervention from individuals and groups external to them. Unless, of course, that it is specified otherwise. Any average person should be able to realise that this closeness implies advantages for those agents who can directly intervene in decision-making processes over those who just form part of the `civil society´ (Hsu, 2008). However, most people (scholars and non-scholar citizens) simply conform with the “subversive” idea of finding a middle point between a robust government structure that seems flexible enough to adapt. And they do so without realising that with this come problems of centralisation, top-down power and dominance, expressed in the form of closed structures with more advantages for individuals on top (Mezza-Garcia & Maldonado, Crítica al Control Jerárquico de los Regímenes Políticos: Complejidad y Topología, 2015). The expectations placed on the Government 2.0 as the solution to many of the problems contemporary societies face illustrates this hope. 
Most individuals also passively adopt their role of citizens native of a state and conform to live under the limit of its artificial frontier and the control of an ad-hoc political regime for the rest of their lives, with political participation restricted to the right to vote or the obligation to be subjected to the law of a state created, in more cases, before they were born. The situation in politics is similar to a critique to software that is not open source: “withholding the source code is a key strategy of control that removes the capacity to interact wit a program, thus limiting the kinds of agency possible in a given software environment” (Tkacz, Wikipedia and the Politics of Openess, 2015, pág. 21). What the quote highlights is how limiting the possibility to openly interact in a social system to only the actions allowed by hierarchical structures of power goes against the complex nature of the human societies to try to organise them. Thus, the notion of openness and the practice of open source seem to bring a solution to get away from step by step and rigid processes of decision-making that have characterised human social systems so far. In line with an ongoing work this is my claim for interactive decision-making processes. 
The relevance of open source in this critique is that it has mastered robust and flexible infrastructures of decision-making at the same time; the balance between tradition and innovation mentioned by (Burgin & Dodig-Crnkovic, 2012). The offline world of politics could benefit from this, since it is still guided by tradition, even when regulating openness. This is why it is usually expected that laws, policies and normativities produce the expected outcomes –which is rarely the case given the complexity of human societies. In reality it is the usual case that when a decision is implemented the object of regulation has already changed and many years go by before the subject is taken into consideration again by decision-makers. This tragic situation is usually the result of decisions being the halting point, the stopping moment, in the processing of a decision. So once a decision is made, decision-makers move on to the next subject. This disregards that co-evolution is the key word between human social systems and their intrinsic dynamics of organisation, regulation and self-organisation. If the traditional mechanisms of decision-making were continuous and rules were more openly adaptive, decisions could modify paralleling the changes in the problem that is being regulated. This is another reason why I hold high hopes in the model presented in the following sections, as I see in open source the potential to counteract the negative effects that institutionalised politics has brought for human social systems.
In an extreme scenario in which an OSGLS is institutionalised, I expect that its open and interactive nature keep it far from presenting the same shortcomings of our contemporary legislative systems. After all, it is reasonable to think that if interactive information processing manages to produce order in systems as complex as biological organisms (also with many components, nonlinear interactions, multilevel scales of processing, etc.) it can also be optimal in other complex social systems as human social systems. Consequently, the interactive information processing of an OSGLS could bottom-up synthetize self-organised patterns of order in human social systems thanks to local interactions. An additional benefit of implementing models such as the OSGLS would be that we could take the random and unpredictable nature of human social systems and embed it in the way legislation is made. After all, individuals would be interacting based on their own perceptions after information collected with the Internet of Things is provided, so it would be acknowledged that decisions are made based on and for short periods of time, bringing with it the possibility for pragmatic adaptive solutions and open decision-processing. 
	Increased complexity in the networks of economic, travelling, educational, friendship, mating networks, etc. facilitated by the diffusion of internet-based platforms has meant the bypassing the number of intermediaries to trade, travel or exchange. This increasing complexity in the world, I claim, requires adaptive models of decisions that surpass the computational power that representation and ad-hoc hierarchical top-down models cannot provide. What we need is a system that is open enough for it to adapt in harmonic ways to sudden and abrupt changes taking place in human societies. It is necessary to acknowledge that a solution to a problem that is useful today might not be useful tomorrow (Maldonado & Gómez Cruz, 2011). Therefore, “openness is (becomes) necessary because no one can know for certain what the best course for society might be from the outset, and at the same time it is assumed that openness provides the best possible conditions for producing knowledge and, therefore, making better decisions” (Tkacz, Wikipedia and the Politics of Openess, 2015, pág. 18). Indeed, as we transition to more complex interplays between offline and places and continue to blur online with offline geographies it is imperative to resort to systems that are not overwhelmed by the complexification of the world and of human human interactions. The internet, the same phenomenon pushing governing bodies to try to be more inclusive by becoming more open to diversity seems to be pushing them towards their eventual collapse if they are not prepared to embrace such diversity. Unless this can be deduced from the analysis of what happens to political systems that do not embrace rightly the transitions of their times (Brunk, 2002). In any case, it seems that their future is in dissolving with the social system as we transition to more self-organised means. At least, that is what I hope the model of OSGLS brings. The libertarian that inhabits inside me would certainly delight herself with openness being key in the gradual decline of hierarchies, and I would certainly like to find that state´s disintegration is somehow rooted in a transition to self-organised ways of decision-making. 
Despite the goal of this document of visualising a legislation practice inspired on the political principles of open source, it is not my interest to design a specific software, program, tool or platform for implementing interactive decision making, but rather to think about a general model for global decision-making, where various sources of information provide big data for it to process, make automatic technical systems in smart cities and individuals discuss around issues that arise. In line with (Tkacz, Wikipedia and the Politics of Openess, 2015), I only see openness possible in decision-making bodies and processes as long as it is understood as a techno-legal quality (Tkacz, Wikipedia and the Politics of Openess, 2015, pág. 24), which loops with legislation as a starting point. My aim is to conclude that open and interactive decision-making dynamics would not have the same shortcomings that representative democracies present such as corruption, intromission of personal interests, manipulation of power dynamics, exclusion and violence as the ultimate resource to become part of the unique decision-making system. 
Up to this point, after having introduced the theoretical background in which a model of OSGLS becomes a necessary asset to think about. It is clear to me that information processing in open source environments is somehow open and can be an embodiment of interaction. If once we display in this thought experiment the properties an OSGLS would have and it turns out that the processing is, indeed, open and, therefore, can be named interactive, then we would have finally reached a model for decision and rule-making in human societies where the system that organises resembles the structures, properties and dynamics of human social systems. If not, I am yet to find another way. What is evident for me at this point is that an OSGLS could bring multiple possibilities for online communication that facilitates information processing in a human society, without it being constrained by an external entity. I cannot help asking myself if I have reached a paradigmatic model for human self-organisation via the internet and a foundation mechanism for a utopian technoanarchy. 
4 PRINCIPLES FOR AN OPEN SOURCE GLOBAL LEGISLATION SYSTEM  
In this section I present the model for distributed decision-making based on general political principles of open source that I have chosen. As I said previously, the aim is to find out the implications of implementing a similar model into the world and creating a discussion around the existence of a global human civilization that organises via rules made in decentralized ways. The concrete objective of using a thought experiment as the methodology is to find out if the epitome of openness in software building, open source, can also produce great results in a political context. In the paragraphs that follow I will describe the model of OSGLS using the most relevant general properties of open source software communities and their organisational dynamics. Sometimes the model is used as a plea to reflect on the quest of achieving a self-organising technoutopia, so the debate is placed around centralized and hierarchical governance versus free anarchies. Nevertheless, in most of the cases the OSGLS is the centre of the discussion, concentrating the questionings on what would happen if we were to implement such model in the world.  Although I focus on a specific model of OSGLS that I have generated, the comments and critiques that arise can be applied for other systems of similar nature that are developed in the future. Therefore, this model of OSGLS is only one of the many possibilities we can think of for political decision-making based on internet-based technologies. 
I am aware that if my goal is to propose open and heterarchical political systems in order to eliminate the barrier between decision-makers and the rest of citizens, it would be counterproductive to delegate decision-making in a new generation of machine-driven aristocrats. Thus, I avoid the shift from current legislative practices with congresses that work as black boxes to one where the black box is replaced by evolutionary algorithms. Instead, I approach decision-making from a place that takes into account the human as much as the machine.  
Some authors have criticised the idealism through which open source is usually seen, as it can be seen with the critique of (Tkacz, Wikipedia and the Politics of Mass Collaboration, 2010) to Wikipedia. However, at this point, there are no reasons to believe that OSGLS legislation would not present the adaptability needed to cope with the fast changes in human social systems and their interactions with their environment. A model for global legislation as I will present it here, in fact, transcends the artificial geographical barriers we work with nowadays in politics. Therefore, in terms of principles and architecture it is, by definition, a more advanced way of doing politics and policy, which is something we should always try to pursue. 
It is not the aim of this document to explain why any individual would participate in an OSGLS decision. Whether it is because of altruism, because that is simply how self-organisation works or, as (Weber, 2004) said, a combination of individual motivations, the logic of the collective good, coordination and complexity, the question is outside of the motivations of this thought experiment. Nevertheless, the position of (Raymond, 1999) when he speaks of the egoboo -altruistic motivations based on personal satisfaction- is a good answer to that question. It is reasonable to think that, as an added value, legislating over common good problems that affect the whole community or even just parts of it will become of interest for individuals who want to improve the quality of their social system and the world. That aside, the focus of this document is how, not why, would an open source system for global legislation be. Due to the collective nature of legislative process in contemporary democracies, and because legislation is the mechanism by which political rules are decided, the document strictly applies the general principles of open source to legislation and leaves aside other aspects of governance. 

4.1. Global Participation

Open source projects are among the best examples of global participatory communities to date. Their online open nature implies executed via participation in forums, controversies and coding are not mediated by national or state frontiers nor ascribed to any physical space. With the focus of a world that is increasingly more interconnected, it is reasonable to believe that extrapolating the common principles of open source projects to politics could mean a world with no supremacy of powers. In other words, a world where specific economic structures and political alliances are no longer more influential than others. Howbeit, it seems that this would not be the case if we resort to the critique of Tkacz to the relevance of political alliances in open source projects, to the point where they even sustain the mechanism of forking (Tkacz, Wikipedia and the Politics of Openess, 2015). After all, when someone wants to fork a project, unless he has allies, the fork will not be successful.  
Yet, as (Proudhon, 1876) (Kropotkin, 2012) and (Hayek, 2012) imagined before, it is beautiful to picture a world were participation in the rule-making of a community spontaneously self-organises with boarderless political participation. Perhaps an OSGLS could finally make political frontiers not be what defines the geographies of political interactions in human societies and not even an issue to consider. From a libertarian approach, a world where legislation and rules are made following open source principles could be the realisation of a frontierless world where communities and human groups harmonically interact mediated by internet-based technologies. I find this not only desirable…but also possible. I engaged in this thought experiment because I believe that open source has the potential to make us libres by massively distributing the possibility to gain access to the solution of a problem by open discussion and coding of a decision, from anywhere in the world. It is, at least, an ideal scenario worth being considered. An open source technoutopia, where technology makes possible an anarchic society founded over the principles of complex systems, is the ultimate goal that I wish to attain via this thought experiment. 
		Now, how precisely would global participation be expressed in this model of OSGLS? It would consist of contributions in discussion forums, controversy solving and the coding of the automatization of technical aspects of living in society. But since we are speaking about a world in which the notion of citizenship is no longer attached to a particular territory, the mechanism of engaging in the polis life that is so central to the history of political thought and one of the pillars of contemporary democratic practices –if we were to conceptualise nation-states as poliarchies of Dahl (Dahl, 1973), would give way to one where sociopolitical participation is no longer seen as a core aspect of individual´s life in society. In fact, in a world where political frontiers are nothing but a remembrance of a constrained past, individual identities would probably complexify to the point where not everybody would be interested in participating in the same discussions. This fact was one of the starting points of a model for decision-making that seems to have solved the problem of not engaging in every discussion, Smartocracy, a trust-based system for collective solutions to problems where individuals delegate, if they wish, specific subject decisions in individuals they trust and who sympathise with their ideas (Rodriguez, 2007). A real democracy, as it happens, should not have the need to be periodically enforced every four or six years in average. 
It is tempting to stress that direct global political participation in matters that affect humankind could play an important role in decreasing the economic inequality in the world, since hierarchical structures in political system are partly to blame for the perpetuation of strong sociopolitical structures that exclude the majority of the population from having access to power (Mezza-Garcia & Maldonado, Crítica al Control Jerárquico de los Regímenes Políticos: Complejidad y Topología, 2015). In fact, the existence of an hegemonic government as the single channel through which directly having an impact on the world legitimises the necessity for certain individuals and groups to cooptate it, even with the use of violence (Mezza-Garcia N. , Self-Organized Sociopolitical Interactions as the Best Way to Achieve Organized Patterns in Human Social Systems: Going beyond the Top-Down Control of Classical Political Regimes, 2013). OSGLS carries an implicit desire for ending political power structures on behalf of a more equalitarian, peaceful and better cared world. 
Due to the global participatory nature of open source projects, in an OSGLS the abstract space of nation-states is replaced by one where cities, smart cities and local rural communities, virtual places and parallel virtual reality worlds interact. Despite how drastic this point may sound, interaction in online, open and participative communities is, even today, no longer shaped nor limited to a geographical territory. Consequently, the diversity of the composition of the networks of human communities is increasing so much that we could soon be closer to a notion of global citizenship where online spaces count as much as offline ones.
Participation in the OSGLS would not be limited to individuals physically ascribed to or living in a community directly related to the problem that is going to be legislated about. This is sustained on the increasing tendency there is for deterritorialising personal identities from the territorial geographies of nation-states, facilitated by the web (Mezza-Garcia N. , Bio-Inspired Political Systems, 2013). In extreme cases, this unlinking of personal identities with national ascriptions is responsible for the rise in `lone wolves terrorism´ -individuals who, without having links to terrorist networks, carry out terrorist attacks following the ideology of a terrorist organisation or are inspired by that organisation to commit terrorist attacks (Spaaij, 2012). A pessimist version of the analysis of an OSGLS would say that we could end up with a world full of lone wolves. 
However, the possibility for Lone wolf terrorism to explode in a global world could be reduced by limiting the quota of who can participate. That is, by setting preferences to individuals living in the physical spaces affected by the solution. This could be done by means of al algorithm that detects where individuals come from or are located in that specific moment of time. It could avoid communities that are external to the problem and with particular political or economic interests to take over communities or cities and control them. But then the implications of such act would be to make the system close and restricted. Thus, although the OSGLS is endowed with an idealism that sees possibilities and answers in open source politics, it becomes harder to maintain its romantic nature when reflecting on the how. I realize that the deterritorialisation of political participation facilitated by open internet technologies could develop into colonial practices facilitated by the internet or an undesirable global version of anarchism. One one side, openness, indeed, could be what leads us to a truly democratic world, where “democratic practices might be succeeded by something that is even more democratic and thus even more open” (Tkacz, 2015, p. 36). Yet, it is not clear if we are ready for the next step in openness compared to democracy; anarchy. 
I see anarchy and democracy as not mutually exclusive, since anarchism does not oppose completely to emergent patterns of organisation. In fact, a harmonic technoutopian anarchy could follow from an advanced form of direct democracy such as Smartocracy. But this notion of a self-produced notion of organisation arising in a spontaneous way per se thanks to the internet leads me to the idea that we could also end up with a world where control over a population is facilitated by online means. In a similar way to today´s military interventions where the most powerful and resourceful governments invade the territory of a country, I can see how global decision-making can lead to the colonization of a physical space by cooptation of the technological online means that operate in particular (resourceful) territories. We should not want that type of outcome. In order to exemplify this point, let´s suppose that in order to avoid hunting and forests being cut somewhere in the Equatorial line in the Americas we use open-sourced drones doing rounds of surveillance. Everybody has access to their code and can choose where they should go. Thus, everybody can see who is below and what is going on in the jungle. Surely they could end up being used by a lone wolf or by someone who can just move them somewhere else and hunt other animal species or cut trees without anybody knowing. Herein, I think some some forms of control over emerging technical aspects of living in societies are needed. Because if we leave automation propel, how would we prevent and battle abuses against nature, vulnerable humans and other animal species like in the previous example? Surely the first answer would be that even in the most self-organised system some sort of control, even self-control, exists. But then, the premise of a utopian and completely open society gets replaced by one where privacy is no longer an issue and has given rise to security by finding a middle point. In the marvellous book The Transparent Society (Brin, 1999), (REF) gets to a similar conclusion. 
It is not my intention here to stress that open source communities are not truly open, since, particularly with Wikipedia, (Tkacz, Wikipedia and the Politics of Openess, 2015) painlessly already carried on that task. He relentlessly criticised the closed nature of openness in open source that has led may authors to approach open source as an ideal model for decentralisation and democratisation of various aspects of societies. Hence, this is now my attempt to use open source as a model for global legislation expecting to find such ideal. If by the end of the thought experiment it turns out that my conclusion is that we cannot legislate based on the political principles of open source, then, to my surprise, I will have fallen as well into the category of authors that resorted naïvely to a counterproductive method such as Douglas Rushkoff and Steven Weber. 


4.2. Onlife Spaces

As clearly illustrated by the Lone Wolves phenomenon, today there is an increasing interplay of online and offline dynamics shaping human life and, especially, sociopolitical tendencies. (Castells, 2015) highlighted how political movements born online were capable of generating changes in the offline world in previous years. They overthrew dictatorships, denounced governments and created a new and more horizontal type of media based on the notion of interaction. As examples he mentions the construction of Spain´s Indignados, #Occupy Wall Street in New York, Iceland´s online constitution, and the Egyptian and Tunisian revolutions. Although another great example is the equal marriage law in Finland studied by (Heikka, The Rise of the Mediating Citizen: Time, Space, and Citizenship in the Crowdsourcing of Finnish Legislation, 2015). Cases like these ones speak about the transformative power of social networks, internet blogs and social networking sites as political mechanisms and it says something about where the world is shifting regarding sociopolitical organisations. Personal identities in spaces with libre internet access are being almost equally moulded by online interactions just as much as they have been created by offline physical proximities in previous human history. I would even say that the online has surpassed the offline shaping of political ideologies. Which is why it is no longer possible to speak about strictly offline or online spaces, as the divisor line between them has blurred. OSGLS would, therefore, take place onlife, a concept coined to refer to the blurring of this distinction between reality and virtuality and human, machine and nature in an information-populated world where interactions are the focus rather than the elements that interact (Onlife-Iniciative, 2015). 
Governments of today are already adopting, creating, using and promoting software and technologies that might end up radically transforming their ontological nature in the long term. Likewise, citizens are having more possibilities to generate inputs into the decision-making, to certain extent. We should prepare for more cases of governments around the world, from Washington D.C. to Finland, Bogotá and Africa, that promote citizen initiatives that create applications using government data. Yet, on their own they are not enough because decision-making continues to remain in the hands of a government. The involvement of governments and co-optation of these technologies restraints to how much transformations can occur in a harmonic way in societies, as they continue to reinforce the separation between governors and citizens. Consequently, as long as they exist we will never be able to speak about openness. Despite the transformative possibilities in onlife sociopolitical dynamics, it seems that there is a downside to the examples mentioned by Castells. As explained by (Heikka, 2016), it seems that the offline success of sociopolitical dynamics that were created onlife depends on the existence of traditional offline traditional policy mechanisms -it is this what marks the difference between a successful gay marriage law in Finland and the not so clear achievements of the Arab Spring. This is in fact one of the biggest failures of the use of internet-based and citizen-informed technologies to feed government process; that they strengthen governments at the expense of citizens, which are left out of the final part of the decisions and great part of the discussion. Even though the bottom-up building of these and similar proposals, not much has changed since the times where emperors, kings and dictators decided what to do in the western world; the topology is still the same (Mezza-Garcia N. , 2013). There is still a long path to cover before governments can truly be considered “open”, as opposed to what followers of the trend of Government 2.0 assume. Still, whether it is an online means that is used to generate an offline effect or an offline action that defines online events, the onlife world in which we live shows signs that this new era of human evolution, the onlife world, came to stay. The open, indeed, cannot be thought anymore outside of the software culture (Tkacz, 2015, pág. 32). But a real direct democracy, it seems, will not be reached as long as the act of governing remains justifying itself in an ad-hoc hierarchies that impose order and control in a top-down fashion by a group if individuals endowed with the capacity of decision-making mostly because of popularity, power or armies (Bakunin, 1970) (Mezza-Garcia N. , 2013) (Mezza-Garcia & Maldonado, 2015). Now matter how open the technologies seem to be. 
It is particularly insufficient, boarding with naive, to expect that accountability in governance embraces a new world of participation, transparency and collaborative governance on their own. Especially when it is done under the umbrella of hierarchical governments. We should be suspicious of these coopting internet-based platforms. The problem, in fact, goes far beyond inputting decision-making and should be rather focused on the computational dynamics of decision-making. That is, on the processing of decisions itself. In this case, legislation, how it evolves, what power dynamics it entails, how it functions and who can ultimately decide, instead of simply making problems visible –which is what most citizen-founded initiatives as the San Francisco application currently do. 
Although many of the examples for onlife political transformations and mobilisations mentioned by Castells and of the last years have been surrounded by an aura of violence, I hope an OSGLS could overcome this problem. How? Since its focus would be to provide a space for human communities to collective generate their own rules and decide on technological and technical aspects of living in society, it would not focus on overthrowing governments nor co-opting power, so some sort of harmony can be guaranteed. Nevertheless, not even this saves the OSGLS from having a notion of power to prioritise decisions. And even if instead in its operating principles it becomes clear that it would patiently await for hierarchal topologies to be delegitimised, there is not much point in hoping for a slow transformation in traditional decision-making and rule-coding practices. Although it is poetic to hope for the moment where finally in-person legislation is surpassed by means of better and more inclusive legislative procedures, how much could this actually achieve? Disruption seems to me like the only alternative. But can we really disrupt governments in harmonic ways? Even if we could, governments are not the only enemies of citizens empowering. There are no reasons to believe that even the most decentralised platform of OSGLS could not be coopted by other forms of governments or groups with interests that go in detriment of others. 
An alternative to the problem of co-optation of the OSGLS by traditional power structures is to leave the system completely in the hands of developers and hackers. Or maybe to meritocratically choose a few `benevolent dictators´ whose ideas and ideals matched the interests of all or most of the individuals that are part of a particular social system. Nevertheless, we have seen with representative democracy that it is impossible for a single person to actually represent the diversity of interests in a social system, and thinking in terms of majorities rarely leads to the best result. 
But how could OSGLS transcend this problem? In representative democracies it is popularity, economic power and, in most cases, coming from a wealthy and influential family what makes an individual statistically more qualified than others to win an election. Conversely, in an open source context, knowledge becomes a more valid source of legitimacy even tough not even open source can guarantee an environment without bureaucracies. (Bruns, 2008) argues that bureaucracies in open source are based on the quality of their contributors, so it is assumed that the people who make the decisions know what they are doing and are more skilled than those who can´t. This can be true for a software building context, but when it comes to a political act of decision-making on regulating aspects of the commons the situation is not so clear. As (Tkacz, 2010) suggests, we should be cautious with the politics behind the production of knowledge, so it could be that my previous argument of placing the OSGLS in the `right hands´ is just an impossible –and quite naïve- task. In fact, I am almost convinced at this point that it is. I will, however, carry on with my thought process, as I refuse to leave the idea that deliberating based on open source practices would just be an online iteration of offline power dynamics. Yet, I cannot help to wonder where, then, do the promises of embracing the onlife go? …
	With the intention of saving my own creation I can try to convince myself that maybe the situation is not as bad as I have put it in the previous paragraphs. After all, there have been profound transformations in how humans interact seen since the creation of the internet that have affected human societies in unprecedented ways compared to the thousands of years since the appearance of humans on Earth, allowing individuals to now be able to explore, at low cost, worlds beyond the physical confinements of the nation-states they inhabit. We have, indeed, seen a strengthening of global networks of individuals who advocate in favour of environmental protection, against animal cruelty and child pornography (Reqiao da Cunha, Forthcoming). And, of course, we have also seen awing examples of personas like Edward Snowden, Julian Assange and, of course Anonymous. None of these would have been possible had not it been for the mediation of the web. This precedent holds up, mildly, the OSGLS model. But I still need to remind myself that not everything that takes place in a decentralised way via the internet is harmonic. In fact, there is a lot of animal and child abuse being shared online and in the dark web and numerous criminal, unethical and violent acts have been committed thanks to the governless, distributed and decentralised structure of the platform. 
I should note that when it comes to the protection of vulnerable populations or living biological beings, no decentralised model of decision-making would be successful unless it has specific protocols designed or engineered to protect them. Possible harms against human children and other animal species should always be prevented, avoided and sanctioned, even at the expense of privacy, for the sake of security, as in the Transparent Society (Brin, 1999), which means that the idea of a harmonic and decentralised technoutopia dwindles. As reluctant as I am to the idea of centrally controlled and surveilled human social systems, when it comes to these subjects, privacy goes to a secondary place. And not to mention individual freedom. 

4.3. Direct Contributions

OSGLS would allow individuals to participate and contribute directly to a decision-making system, without any mediators. Although this may sound extremely promising –since it would mean no representatives, no politicians and, as one would hope, no governments- I will try to explore if it is inherently possible. I will leave aside the case that (Rushkoff, 2003) makes for spokespersons and  mouthpieces, as I consider their figure not only necessary but also desirable. 
Today, open source environments foment the building of platforms where everybody who has the knowledge to modify and run them can contribute to collective projects. Legislating á la open source could mean that in a direct manner, individuals with the technical knowledge would be able to create the rules of automated systems in smart cities such as traffic lights in a city, directions of roads, electricity fluxes or other aspects that become evident with the Internet of Things (Mezza-Garcia, Forthcoming=?). This would imply for the average individual to have direct participation and contributions without mediators or representatives. Nonetheless, this does not mean that the OSGLS is incorruptible. The case could be that the code is manipulated by a sufficiently skilled and/or powerful group with particular interests that do not match those of the general community. Even if this is not the case, as previously mentioned, the will of the majority is not necessarily the best option for the survival of the society, as it can sometimes be permeated by emotional attributes of racism or a desire of supremacy and domination upon minorities. 
If we place the model of OSGLS in a world without national frontiers –which is the one allowed by the open topology of the internet-, we would end up with a model that has no relations to nationalist ideas or political parties. This is a good point as it can lead to a community conformed by such diversity that a division no longer exists between minorities and majorities and every individual simply “is”. But, as in previous properties of the OSGLS, this scenario seems too naïve. If there is something that most science fiction books have taught us is that technological enhancement of human species will divide the human species even more than now. In (Huxley, 2008) , for instance, the human and post-human species is divided according to the degree and fitness of eugenics enhancement, dividing the population Alpha, betha, Gamma, Deltha, Epsilon. I mention this because if the OSGLS works in a world that has forgotten of nation-state frontiers, then the social and cultural trends must also be seen in the context of a world decades or centuries away from ours. A world where eugenics is almost the rule and where the evolution of our species is guided by technological enhancement. Perhaps I am being too generous with my experiment of seeing a harmonic anarchy in practice. Subsequently, for practical purposes I will step back and imagine for a moment a world where there are still some kind of political frontiers. In that world an OSGLS can not be the means we use to legislate because technology and automation are not embed enough into our human social systems. I am finding myself at the moment in the middle of a space/time dilemma, where I do not know where to place a platform not prone to be coopted, but still participatory enough to not remove completely the human particular interest factor from the decision-making, and still let it open and interdependent enough for it to be a proposal based on communities. 
I am tempted to give in to the idea of rules in a human society being generated by an artificial intelligence that computes using big data coming from the internet of things and generates with it the best outcome for a decision possible, for that particular moment in time. But then this would not be anymore the OSGLS because it would involve almost no human participation, unless it is limited to solving controversies via something similar to an OSGLS platform. In which case, to propose a single channel for decision-making corrupts the idea of emerging multiple systems of organisation. Thus I should examine political participation in this context resorting to what we have learnt from open source: how to make everyone participate and overcome the average identity of current open source contributors -white male in their twenties (Tkacz, 2015). A solution would be to think that a global world will not have this type of differentiation because programing will be as common as reading and writing texts. But I cannot assume any future social configuration of the world for the sake of the model other than those provided by the political principles of open source itself. I then have no other option but to place the emphasis on security and hope that participation makes it work well. That is, with participation being backed by a series of distributed security protocols in the complex network that would work as today´s Montesquieu´s balance and checks and separation of powers. Theses ones would help processes be as transparent as possible, so that lobbying could be reduced to its minimum expression; that is, of absence. But, could it really? 
It is true that replacing lobbying and black box politics with open and completely transparent verification protocols for individual contributions in the OSGLS and testing solutions in parallel online simulations could derive in better decisions than those of politicians and representatives deciding in their black boxes. But then we would have to forget about the whole discourse of openness and accept that, as (Tkacz, 2015) pointed out, it brings with it closed structures. There are two options, we either accept that openness can hardly exist and make peace with statistically reduced number of individuals and groups endowed with the time and technical expertise to program decisions and solve controversies or we keep trying to make openness possible by means of another way. I am more inclined to not giving up yet on the idea that the OSGLS or models of similar nature can thrive and revert two thousand and a half years of hierarchical political regimes. Therefore, I will continue to explore the implications of the model for what is the rest of the document, but I must accept that at this point it is hard to see how can it or any other model of decision-making based on open source that seeks to be open could be possible.   

4.4. Incomplete Legislative Procedures and Self-Referential Frameworks

In “The Cathedral and the Bazaar” Eric Raymond gives some advices for the creation of open source projects, some of which also serve as arguments for why these type of projects are so successful. For instance, the constant releases of Beta versions of the software mean a constant re-visiting of bugs and problems. Indeed, problems in open source environments usually tend to be solved since “given a large enough beta-tester and co-developer base, almost every problem will be characterised quickly and the fix obvious to someone” (Raymond, 1999, pág. 8). In other words, by having a large pool of individuals who can participate in the coding of a decision -whether it consists on programing a technical aspect or contributing to solve a controversy- the chances for a problem to be solved increase with the number of participants. If we think about the (reduced) pool of decision-makers in our communities (let us say, nation-states), the question arises of whether a proportionally reduced number of individuals deliberating based on their intuition and convictions can hardly produce a sound body of rules. This situation becomes more dramatic if we consider the static view on the problems that are regulated, which are approached as if their present state were to remain always like that. This is a reason why the moment a decision is made and when it is implemented mark two completely different stages of the problem. Yet, the second one is based exclusively on the first. Conversely, in open source software creation frameworks we can see the benefits of what (Eberbach, Goldin, & Wegner, 2004)  say is one of the richest characteristics of interactive computation,  incompleteness. As pointed out by (Eaves, 2010) in open source nothing is final and everything can be improved. 
Legislation is not a formalisation in the mathematical sense of the rules in a community nor in a representative democracy. However, it is intended to formalise these rules of a society with coherence and no logical contradictions. If we were to assume that it is, indeed, a logical formalisation in the classical sense, then we could imply that traditional legislation is seen as a closed ecosystem of rules. Primarily because the function of laws is to regulate the overall interactions taking place in a human social system; an impossible task considering the open universe of possible dynamics and interactions in human societies. This naively professed completeness gets strengthened with the circular mechanism of legitimation that contemporary nation-states and representative democracies have: themselves. Hence it weakens the effectiveness of laws as rule formalisations. 
In contrast to the static world of offline law-creation, the speed of change of rule-making in an OSGLS would be facilitated by the rapid changing environment of the internet. Since this one works as an open system, it would allow a harmonic interaction between the OSGLS and its frame of reference, the world. Open-ended collaborative creation could be one of the advantages of an OSGLS. Legislating á la open source could end with the current limitation of political systems when they see problems as static. In fact, in open source projects halting exist only for practical purposes. These halts take place in the form of commits, which lock a decision or change in an open source project. Locking decisions made in an OSGLS, I state, could ensure harmonic transitions between each modification of the normativity, wisely, leaving the space open for future modifications as the problem and the system co-evolve. Nevertheless, not even this open scenario is exempt from falling into setbacks arising from the emergence of temporary bureaucracies (or algorithms?) who would have sufficient influence over the system in order to make a commit. 
The problem of who typical from representative systems of legislation and that I am trying to stay away from by proposing an OSGLS would almost inevitably be reproduced in this context. In simpler terms, if the system is always incomplete and open for modifications coming from the community, who would we decide what is accepted or not as a commit? Would we have a benevolent dictator for each kind of subject, a Smartocracy-based trust system of delegation or the decision would rather rely on an AI? And if it is an AI who decides, what if the contributors that program the algorithm behave `mischiefly´? Do we resort to the body of coders proposed by (Burton, 2010) to avoid it? But then, wouldn´t they have to be hired by a top-down hierarchy to serve its interests? Isn´t this what current offline governments already do anyway? It seems that the incomplete and, in principle, never-ending nature of an open source project is an advantage for participation and inclusion in environments of software production and necessary when it comes to open governance. But I do not see it as fully compatible with openness via interaction when I think about how to implement it.  
Bakunin (Bakunin, 1970) wisely said that states are ad-hoc entities that force the voluntary adscription of the individuals they shelter, ruling almost every single aspect of their lives. Curiously enough, states with representative democracies do it as much as dictatorships and, to my surprise, a decision-making system based on open source would also do so. If the aim of an OSGLS would be to program technical aspects related to problems of the commons in cities, there is no way around intrinsically assuming that the OSGLS would be the mainstream or unique way to do so. It is hard to imagine how would the OSGLS exist in parallel with other systems that would also automatize the same networks -for instance: traffic lights or garbage collection-, in ways that can harmonically coexist. If there are more inputs to the OSGLS than the ones this is built to receive, it could collapse. And if there is just one means to decide, then the social frame of reference is not open enough. And, therefore, not really open. 
The emphasis that I have given to trying to find a mechanism of legitimation external to the OSGLS comes from the importance of what Tkacz calls `the frame´. That is, that framework or reference that exists outside the system itself and legitimates what goes on “inside” it. Tkacz claims that legitimation in open source projects is given not by the managerial command as a power legitimator or the guiding of direction but the correspondence of the decisions with the principles established in the frame (Tkacz, 2015). These can be similar to openness transparency, inclusion and legitimation. Clearly, offline legislation does not have this form of external legitimation. If it existed, then the legitimacy of legislation would not be on the mechanism of positioning attained by the legislators, but it would rather come from an external source to the decision-making. Therefore, the frame would be open, legislation complete and this interplay would be legitimised in open interaction with the environment or external entities. Taking this into account, it seems hard to imagine how can the frame of an OSGLS exist outside itself because for it to become the means through which legislate globally, then it mean it has sufficiently being established for it to guaranty its own subsistence. Just like a self-fulfilled prophecy, if we regulate via an OSGLS and this becomes the norm, its external legitimation will no longer be given by external entities because it will be embed into human communities as naturally as traffic lights. So it would become self-referential. And even if we try to reduce this situation to its minimum expression by limiting its participation in human social systems and make it as automatic and autonomous as possible by gathering information only via the internet of Things so that information is not politicised in any way, the assumption that the Internet of Things will be able to provide full information of all the interactions taking place in a social system would only function properly if there are no socioeconomic inequalities in the world. 
If we try to discard this problem by stating that by the time a global government replaces current nation states every individual in the world will have free internet access or that the economy will not be money-based anymore, the question of inequality continues to be a similar one if we consider that this can be accompanied by the emergence of communities of individuals who do not want to be connected and migrate to rural areas. So, would an OSGLS be possible in this context? Not if we remember that one of the consequences of direct and global participation was online colonisation and that any system of ad-hoc nature can become self-referential with time. In open source projects, and I include the model of OSGLS discussed here, leaders “will emerge in specific situations because the community perceives them to be the best in that instance at a particular task” (Tkacz, Wikipedia and the Politics of Openess, 2015, pág. 86). This does not present any problems as long as it is temporary, for that particular task and if that leadership does not come attached with significant individual benefits. Nevertheless, the existence of leadership makes it political almost in the same sense voting is today, risking the automation and objectivity we are trying to achieve by thinking about this type of the system. Even if the automation of decision-making is computed using data gathered with the IoT, since we are referring about a particular type of problems, problems of the commons, losing objectivity can signify reinforcing economic social and political disparities in terms of influences in the world. Again, the difference between self-referential representative democracies with self-contained dictatorships and an OSGLS -or any other system that tries to solve an aspect of governance via open source- becomes blurry to me. Just as representative democracies are founded on the idea that power is given to governors by the body of citizens who elected them and then they become a close loop where the electors are ruled by those they elect, the myth of inclusion of an OSGLS will reinforce the power of those who implemented it. This makes the process of legislating by means of OSGLS to be a close and pseudocomplete flaw model, just slightly better, more inclusive and sophisticated than direct political participation in representative democracies.
So, what about agreement and consensus? Even if the IoT gave us real-time accurate information of all the interactions occurring in human societies, how will we achieve consensus in a OSGLS? With Wikipedia we have seen that the focus is not on the idea of general agreement itself but on how the agreement is backed by evidence that comes outside the system  -the frame- (Tkacz, 2015), which sounds very reasonable. Nevertheless, how to back evidence without getting to the consensus of which sources are valid sources of information in a space where governance is distributed and decentralised to the point of anarchy. How can we reconcile both concepts and how can we avoid circularity and self-references in structures that are autonomous and automatic? I do not see an answer for this problem politically, not even in a context of open source. 
One way to avoiding the politisation of an OSGLS would be by securing it to the point where it is not possible for it to be hacked. But then this means that it would have to be an advanced form of AI if we wish to eliminate this human factor. I expect that as we upload and dissolve our existence in the cloud environments, become a Type I Civilisation in the Kardashev Scale (Kardashev, 1964) or transition to a Global Brain (Heylighen, 2008) the technical aspects of our interconnected lives become more crypto secured as linked protocols make certain systems harder to penetrate where we trace our barriers. But then we go back to the threat of a centralised authority coopting the system. Having networked systems outside of the OSGLS providing information about it and others verifying it makes the OSGLS go a step away from being self-contained, indeed. But it would be at the expense of one of what could save it from becoming a techno-centred iteration of our current systems of decision-making, with a solidified mainstream core. That type of architecture might be open enough for building software, but not for organising a society. Gödel´s theorem of completeness versus consistency (Gödel, 1962) can sheer light on open systems and systems that seek to thrive with the guidelines of openness. 
Despite that this the OSGLS is not presented here as a mathematical model, its feasibility is computational and its success depends on its information processing dynamics. If the technology used is good enough to prevent perturbations from the information that comes, and if it would filter the information in the system in an embed way while it continues to be open, then the external verification becomes somehow irrelevant. Which means that the most transformative aspect of legislating via open source, and I extend this to governance based on internet-based technologies more generally, would not be open source itself, nor the technology, nor the politics, but the frame; the lack of it. But if a system completely lacks a frame, it would either behave incoherently or it would give way for deviations we should avoid at all cost such as animal and child abuse. It seems that the answer for how to create transformative governance practices and more open rule-making in human social systems is not in open source. I hope, nonetheless, that the salvation for the OSGLS and for legislating via open source more broadly would be on the notion on forking them.  
5 CAN WE FORK THE STATE?  
In this section I will use one of the most relevant characteristics of open source, forking, as an ultimate result to try saving the OSGLS as the means to legislate in an anarchic technoutopian society. Forking refers to the possibility for anybody to take the source code of a project and use it to create their own project (Weber, 2004) (Tkacz, 2015). Despite how easy it may sound, forking usually only happens in extreme cases when an internal controversy is not solved or when a group is solidly dissatisfied with the direction a project is taking (Tkacz, 2015). Yet, the possibility to fork is an important factor in the success of open source projects for those who participate in them because “in the last resource, when they disagree with decisions that are taken, there is always the possibility of  `forking the code´, introducing a change to the software that not everyone agrees with, and then letting a free choice and market selection converge on the preferred iteration” (Tkacz, 2015, pág. 134). Therefore, users or members of the community can then decide if leaving to the fork or if remaining in the original project. In this sense, Tkacz claims, forking is a mechanism for legitimation that has little to do with actual forking, and is more closely related to the satisfaction of the contributors with the governance and the politics of the project (Tkacz, 2015, pág. 134). Forking leads project managers or `benevolent dictators´ to run the project keeping the general best interest of the community in mind. Otherwise, the contributors could be lost and leave to another fork. This is why it is said that forking has the capacity to avoid tyrannies in open source environments. In the words of Fogel “forks, or rather the potential for forks, are the reason there are no true dictators in free software projects…Imagine a king whose subjects could copy his entire kingdom at any time and move to the copy to rule it as they see fit. Would not such king govern very differently from one whose subjects were bound to stay under his rule no matter what he did?...This is why even projects that are not formally organised as democracies are, in practice, democracies when it comes to important decisions. Replicability implies forkability; forkability implies consensus” (Fogel, 2005, pág. 88). 
It would be interesting to see a practice of forking in representative democracies. Despite the software origin of the concept, then notion of `pursuit of freedom of assembly´ has been present in liberal governments, as the first amendment of the United Stated Constitution mentions. The words freedom and freedom of assembly have, indeed, become today a pillar of democracies. Yet, individuals cannot group into new systems of governance they consider better than the ones they are subjected to. They can only form subsets of representative democracies. If freedom of assembly would be based on the political principle of liberty behind forking, it would be possible to fork governments, states and laws in peaceful ways. Only in doing so we would achieve a reference framework outside current nation-states and their legitimacy would not be ad-hoc. 
To great extent, it is a fallacy that citizens give shape to contemporary states just because they play a role in the voting system so decisions are the result of the will of the collectiveness. Voting is just a microscopic act and, as a mechanism of participation, it is a limited form of democracy. If that false belief that voting is participating would sustain, then nation-states would be constantly renovating their ontology and the citizens would be in charge of directly deciding what to make of their own systems of governance. Hence, on a more fundamental level it should be possible to fork the existing code around the functioning of the government and the organisation of the nation state. Whether this translates into new rules, new ontologies, new structures, new individuals or new practices, it should be possible for this to occur without being catalogued as a `coup d´état´. Instead, it shall be seen as a natural expression of democracy.
 Undeniably, forking the state sounds as poetry to the ears of a libertarian, but it is far from being the current case. Today governments are transitioning to the 2.0 trend that seeks more citizen participation, yet restricted to the legal confinements of the state. They are becoming more open to citizen engagement, as a matter of fact…as long as it is within the perimeters of what is already allowed. So in reality individuals do not have a real direct option to shape governments in representative democracies, as their participation is limited to choosing who becomes part of the topology of power. Voting on its own is a very petty way of engaging in political participation that has no real correlation with owing the system that governs. We have seen many cases where the historical equivalent of forking a state -overthrowing a government- has ended up in civil wars or, what is worst, the perpetuation of the same structure but with different agents. Cuba after the socialist revolution and Egypt after the Arab Spring are just two cases worth mentioning. Nevertheless, I believe that a more sophisticated means of forking in a political context could lead to more sophisticated forms of political organisation. I agree with the claim that “As a unique model of exit, I am tempted to conclude that forking is a truly wondrous thing, imbued with an astounding set of capacities” (Tkacz, 2015, pág. 139). 
Just as in open source, forking a state should be legitimate in a political context, possibly being shaped as creating new governments of any size if the current service provider(s) is (are) not serving the purposes of the community. And this should be taken as natural as to not produce any deaths in the process. That is, not by means of violence and coercion but by simply presenting a system that works best in practice that individuals voluntarily would ascribe to. If it is able to attract supporters, then that should be enough. Sort of. Allow me to explain this last doubt. Forking can be seen as not necessary in the context of a representative democracy because of the formal mechanisms the latter provides for citizens to organise politically. When speaking about the freedom of expression and of assembly, (Hancock, 2010) says that there are `tools of revolution´ that citizens can use to keep governments in place in case they want to exceed their actions “We may imagine –he mentions- `if it gets too bad, we can just revolt´. Invariably cool heads prevail, but the virtual threat of such an action does keep the government from getting too far outside of its democratic mandate”. I have to disagree with this very naïve claim when referring to the offline world of politics. It is true that in the open source culture forking a project is “a tool of revolution intended to safeguard the real freedoms in software cultures” (Hancook, 2010); “At the most basic level, the safety net allows for the exit of participants; This freedom of association is perhaps the most fundamental” (Tkacz, 2015, p. 134). But these quotes do not apply for a political world that is still fixed with the idea of hierarchies, governments and representatives. Unfortunately, nation-states cannot be forked. Or can they? 
“By creating the right to fork code, the open source process transfers a very important source of power from the leader to the followers. The privileges that come with leadership depends on the continuous renewal of a contingent grant from the community. This comes as close to achieving practical meritocracy as is likely possible in a complex governance situation” (Fogel, 2005, pág. 181). “According to Fogel, the replicability of free software projects means that any “loser” of a formal process, regardless of whether or not the procedure is itself seen as fair, can leave to preside over his or her own kingdom. All kingdoms are therefore harmonious utopias where everyone is in agreement. At the extreme end of consensus, however, lies a world with a million kingdoms, each populated by a single (happy) king or queen. Agonism is replaced with radical separation” (Tkacz, 2015, pág. 136). Thus, in principle the practice of forking a `state´ and its rules as a political act of leaving a political project when there is fundamental disagreement with its frame or functioning could lead us to a world where there is competition for the best provision of distributed citizen services. In turn this result could, why not, lead towards a world where “governments” are continuously created and deconstructed, evolving or fading in the process of creating one that works best in practice in a particular moment of time for a specific purpose. In that way the power would be transferred from leaders to the community. But, is it really that simple? A downside of the previous situation is that this type of governance only works for the community that decides to be engaged. Thinking of forking in a political governance context makes political engagement somehow necessary. And this leaves aside the fact that not everybody has the time, the interest, nor the technical means to do so. 
In an ideal scenario each one of us would have the required technologies, time, abilities and desire to manage our own `states´ and having more direct and open participation in sociopolitical decision-making, instead of continuing to be subjected to the authority, will, rule and law of an abstract entity, an out-of-date concept, imposed upon us before we were even born, the nation-state. Or, in the best case, at least delegate it in a Smartocracy-like system. But even in a context of techno-driven self-governance, I can see how nested hierarchies and temporary leaders will emerge. As a matter of fact, the creation of temporary leaders backed by internet-based technologies does not necessary mean a world that is more open, dynamic, more horizontal than heterarchical and clearly decentralised. As Tkacz already criticised “no doubts leaders do emerge and hold sway over specific groups or build up authority in relation to the frame” (Tkacz, 2015, pág. 86) –which could keep the door open for never-ending hierarchies. 
At the beginning of this thought experiment I was inclined to think that forking a state in the same way forking takes place in open source projects could reduce inequality in the world. Partly because the very nature of open source, as (Tkacz, 2015) presents it, is, in principle, a very good response to any gender (economic) and geographical imbalances that are in the world due to  the possibility is there for everybody to participate, any tactic that would seek to make the network of decision-making more homogeneous would counteract the free arrangements that would sustain open interaction in the first place. This is just one reasons why there is still optimism placed on open source, with (Rushkoff, 2003) and (Weber, 2004) embodying them. But then it is inevitably to go back to the previous assessment that not all members of a community will have the technical knowledge, time nor the interest to execute this practice. So there are reasons to believe that the situation would strengthen the phenomenon we have seen in open source projects such as Wikipedia, mostly built by white males in their twenties. 
I previously mentioned how in software environments project managers tend to behave in ways that the community of contributors would accept thanks to the threat of forking. But I am not so sure the situation would be so harmonic if we extrapolate the possibility to fork a project –in this case a nation state- to a political space that has to deal with the problem of multiple systems of decision-making in the same territory -“multiple kingdoms”, to use the same language as above. History has taught us that it is usually not a good idea to have have multiple decision-making systems upon the same territory. The list for examples of civil wars, coup d´état and mutiny attempts that prove this point is too vast. There are too many cases where the co-optation of the ruling apparatus has resulted in wars and deaths.
 In part because groups who want to attain power are in most cases trying to secure at any cost their place at that single hierarchy of benefits called government. Nonetheless, I wonder how much this is the actual cause of political violence and what would happen if a place for competition to provision of services is presented without keeping the figure of a single ruling government. That is, if political groups could compete to provide particular services to those individuals who wanted to be covered by their umbrella. Would we see a phenomenon guided by preferential attachment, the property that explains the behaviour of the rich get richer  and how hubs in complex networks tend to attract more connexions than less connected nodes (Barabási & Albert, 1999). Thus, whoever or whatever provides the best and most convenient services becomes bigger and attracts more individuals, families or groups. I doubt the possibility for cities due to the size and completely discard full nation-states.  I would be tempted to add “in exchange of following certain rules”, but then the idea of a voluntary and open political adscription becomes mediated by means of institutionalising decision-making so close to what we now have that I do not see a real difference if taken into practice. 
The idea is that what we now know as citizens would act more as users of a service, where adscription is defined by service satisfaction in the solution of both, individual freedoms and problems of the commons. Citusers is the neologism that I coin to explain the role of the individual user of a public service in hands of a private group. If we think of how this system where individuals voluntarily ascribe to or follow the rules that “govern” their territories and virtual worlds –organising is a much better word-, we then get an even more complex and richer scenario in terms of diversity. In an ideal version of this scenario opposites would not necessary have to clash and probably will not even exist; Citusers would follow rules they choose to follow, creating, as their lives evolve, their own personal government-like service provision to solve problems of the commons. Because this provision would be offered by many individuals and groups simultaneously, it is possible that the emerging topology is that of a multiplex global network, where the possibility to fork your ins and takes in the decision-making could lead service providers to improve their job. Consequently, it would be a matter of individual choice to choose which rules to follow and which physical and virtual services to receive, where forking an adscription as a mechanism of exit and improvement will always be latent. 
So far the previous paragraph presents my ideal version of the scenario. I would now like to take into account a less community-utilitarian version of the provision of services in private hands mediated by no central authority. I do not, nevertheless, want to frame this proposal into a strictly rational one where individuals make their choices completely detached from emotional motives. It makes sense to think that citusers, no matter the situation, will tend to choose the best fork for them. One would expect that in the majority of cases they opt for the one that would also tend to benefit as many individuals as possible in the onlife community. On the other side, I cannot imagine a world where choosing which rules to follow and what services to receive is the result of a completely emotionally detached decision-making process, so this means that the solution for this interaction would not be stationary. Due to all the combinations possible there are to solve this problem, I will not deep into the hyperastronomical number of solutions there are. 
One problem that I see with forking the state in a context of pre-OSGLS is that in a world where multiple micro-states simultaneously coexist in the same territory there could be an increase in lone wolves and individuals not “minding their own business” and wanting to impose their will on the rest of society. I have two alternative vias to partially solve this problem, so far. Either we let small private forks decide what to do (secluding or killing, for instance) individuals who want to create an overruling notion of hierarchical power or we create previous protocols to avoid this and make an AI guarantee that no human or post-human want to become a governor. We can also think of the case where full immersion virtual reality becomes so embed in out lives that the humans can use their own virtual reality world to make reality their childhood fantasies of power and control. With the first scenario, justice in private hands, I can see many problems arising, as the cases of paramilitaries, for instance, in contemporary Colombia show, where the length of skirts or who do people interact with became a motive to kill. Unfortunately, I see a similar outcome resulting from worldview clashes, looped in disagreements, conflicts, microwars and –hopefully not- even biological weapons being spread throughout the whole planet to punish good tolerance in the global community. However, I wonder if these groups emerged a as a means of coopting the hierarchical topology of state governance, in the same way in which guerrillas in contemporary Colombia also emerged as a way to fill protection voids in geographies where the state did not go or if problems of over-ruling and coopting or creating a hierarchy will always be present in human societies. 
What would happen, I ask, if there are no expectations of having a single political entity that controls. The question remains open for a further exploration: in a future technologically immersed anarchy will hierarchies emerge? I am more inclined to say no since war and conflicts are a reflection of the very nature of hierarchical governance, which I expect fades away as we turn to a more playful and exploratory civilisation once the nature of jobs, nationalities and power change. I see the current state of the world followed by political ideologies, where the primitive mass-like behaviours that create political violence today that will be eradicated as internet and virtual reality leads us to explore more places, sensations and experiences in our imagination -rather than only physical places. In an extremely individualistic society mediated by internet-based technologies, why would someone bother about becoming a ruler if followers are to busy using virtual reality to draw forests, have an orgasm every fifteen minutes or going to space. Also, if he, she or it can become so in his or her own private virtual reality world(s). With a more illustrative and politically significant example, why blowing yourself up to kill dozens of real humans in an airport and dying in the process so that you can go to an extremely sexualised version of heaven and have orgies with sixty wives when you can do it over and over again, kill more people and have intercourse with more women in a virtual world. Or, why secluding millions of people in an isolated country in a peninsula of Asia so that they can admire your very petty existence when you can have billions of virtual reality individuals adulating you without having to seclude them from the real world. And, for cases of more deviant and psychopathic individual behaviours, why testing on other species in a laboratory or satisfy deviant sexual fantasies by raping a human infant when the possibility would be there, virtually, to do it more times and more freely without harming any biological living being. Although this may sound as an extreme example, my point is to illustrate how full immersion in virtual reality will keep post humans busy and the world less violent –I hope. God, Allah, Zeus and Vishnu will be as real as the virtual gods created by a three years old child in her own little virtual bubble. Ridiculous forms of political and personal dissatisfaction similar to the previous examples where humans harm others simply do not parallel a world where power is absent and where technology makes personal identities more possible. 
The question of whether this scenario would be less violent or more peaceful is even now very important. It all depends to great extent on whether sociopolitical decision-making finds non-colliding protocols for a harmonic interplay of multiplex networks of organisation in an onlife world so that these can prosper in a fructiferous manner. Since the provision of services would be in hands of privates it is not my intention here to specify how would the interactions in the multiplex networks be organised. Thus, at this point I can only state that for this to work in ways that are beneficial for the whole community, at least in a suboptimal way, it is important to have a strong bioethical frame behind every action of our deterritorialised world. In the wiki community, for example, there is a wiki project of micronations that can enlighten how can harmony be achieved when there are no previous power structures in place. These group of micronations have bodies of laws and international treaties between them, as well as sanctioning mechanisms and supranational organisations, but have not been recognised by the world nation-states. That and whether they are serious attempts to create states or not do not matter at the moment. But the significance from a philosophical point of view is high, as the leaders of the micronations -usually self-proclaimed kings and queens of their own home territories-, deconstruct the hegemonic narratives of current sovereign state powers. Even if it is only to the confinement of their own micro kingdoms in their homes, as an exercise of self-legitimacy it is remarkable. The same, of course, also applies for micronations that are not from the Wikicommunity such as the well-established Principality of Sealand, the Republic of MolossiaXXX and Micras . These are sound examples of small practices in the direction of forking via thought simulation exercises that have not produced any violent result. I would say that part of why relies on these micronations having emerged as an entity on their own rather than in opposition to current nation-states nor to tackle down a government. They are a claim in favour of our own governability, some of them mediated by technology. The problem with this as a model for the offline/onlife world is that currently there are still governments, nation-states and a great machinery of institutionalised politics that does not seem to want to give away its influence and power. But this does not mean that peaceful scenarios of their dwindling are not achievable. It is important to always keep in mind the position of (Kant, 2014) regarding world peace. 
Just as with the micronations project, we could think of an onlife world where the conflicts that may come from having multiplex networks of norms or with “many kings or queens doing similar things in the same space or territory” can harmonically be solved and that coexistence in this context is possible. We can also try and think that overlapping of onlife normativity will not generate any violent conflicts in the offline world. Although this is valid for a strictly online context, the offline components of contemporary human interactions implies cases such as animal and child abuse where having fixed regulations, preventions and punishments are needed.  Additionally, because human survival still depends greatly on the physical territory, probably, against my optimism, we could end up with a world full of micro powers and paramilitary forces rather than self-organised cituser services offerors. Still, I believe that we could find some utilitarian principles in a commons-based and technology driven way of organising ourselves without any central control. Although not directly, the how must be connected to forking in a way. After all, even if we patiently expect for nation-states to be forgotten in their slow decline, a networked supra entity based on individual direct contributions and freedom of participation and is the most likely scenario to emerge in future decades and centuries. (Heylighen, 2016) and (Last, Forthcoming) discussed this as a global brain with offer networks in a global commons. In this context the two main threats become vulnerability of some species and communities, hacking and the OSGLS being coopted by a centralised supra authority. These two subjects make me doubt my own ideas of the feasibility for a fully self-organise global world where local interactions give place to a more harmonic sociopolitical world. I see my idea of a utopian technoanarchy hardly achievable by focusing exclusively on the principles of open source. Child and animal welfare should not be sacrificed at the expense of self-organisation.  
Several months into trying to make this thought experiment on an OSGLS succeed I have realised that extrapolating the political principles of open source software creation and the community dynamics of open source to political legislation would not translate into an actual open system. To my surprise, at this point I have left aside some of the most relevant characteristics of open source as feasible in a political context and I now sympathise more with the idea of limiting the use of using open source to build an AI that organises human communities, rather than decision-making and automation via open source itself. It seems to me that open source has lost a battle in an environment of openness with the properties I chose in the previous sections. But with certain degree of confidence I can also state that the critique applies more broadly beyond this model.
6 EMERGENT EMERGENCIES OF GOVERNANCE VIA OPEN SOURCE PRINCIPLES 


According to Kant the age of majority was attained once individuals had the courage to think for themselves. Herself. For the OSGLS to work we must assume that most individuals have attain the majority of age. Yet, there is another barrier present in the OSGLS that does not relate to self-determination but to lack of learnt skills and abilities: a new analphabetic. Today an analphabetic person is categorised as someone who does not know how to read and or write. A programing analphabetism could be an entry barrier to political rule-making via an OSGLS –or another internet-based system of similar nature. The reason being that individuals would have to have additional skills that would allow them to participate in the system. Thus, a mentally underage and analphabetic person would be someone who does not know how to code. Although I am tempted to stress that programing will be embed into future school education systems and in the culture of learning outside of school and, equally important as reading and writing and, therefore, every child will be taught how to code. Although I sympathise with this idea, it is still an assumption. Consequently, placing a programing-based decision-making system at the middle of how rules are made in societies could end up accentuating the perpetuation of individual and group disadvantages based on socioeconomic conditions in the world. I refuse to back a model that does so. 
I find it very hard at this point, when it comes to future sociopolitical interactions, to think of them in ways that are not mediated by internet-based technologies. But I see many hindrances for how from extrapolating directly from open source can avoid creating iterations of hierarchical political systems. There are, indeed, big questionings related to how transformative bringing these technologies into governance problems can be. Some of this ideas are too lagom,. For instance, a semi-detached and temporary labour relationship between coders and governments proposed by (Burton, 2010) as a way to decentralising –and optimising- government services would continue to have governments at the centre. Hence, there would still be a focus on top-down hierarchical power. Despite that Burton presented it as a middle point between open source in individual hands versus open source in hands of governments, or self-organisation versus self-governance, the question is still based on decision-making as a stagnantically concentrated capacity of a closed group by the end of the processing -the idea I am tying to get away from. 
(Tkacz, 2015) criticised the pseudo-horizontal aspect of open source practices and the temporary emergent leadership behaviours in software cultures, stating that the collaborative dynamics in these environments were not spontaneous and were based on implicit notions of hierarchies –very clear in controversy solving approaches. After this thought experiment, I cannot disagree with his critique, as I have also reached to the conclusion that even the most open open-source model for rule making in a society would be a techno-driven iteration of real world politics. It seems that I should find alternative technologies as the propelling mechanism for the emergence of a techno-flourishing and self-organised anarchy. In agreement with Tkacz, true openness in the context of open source seems as a utopian notion to attain. The OSGLS, for example, just like any other platform, would always be at risk of being overtaken by a centralized authority, a bad-intended individual or a group is that uses it in its own favour. It could even facilitate new sets of internet-supported practices of crimes and terrorism. Still, I approach with reluctance the pessimist scenario that our human existence will always be subject to top-down powers. Yet, it is clear to me at this point that open source principles are not enough to lead towards a decentralised, open and self-organising world, since the same principles that makes them seem open and heterarchical are those that can lead to close and hierarchical practices. Horizontality is also blurry at this point, even in a scenario where every individual can directly participate.  

7 CONCLUSIONS: WHEN COMPLEXITY, AFTER DEMOCRACY…ANARCHIES

If we approach human social systems from a complex systems perspective, then we will easily see that, as any other complex adaptive system, they have an intrinsic tendency to self-organise (Mezza-Garcia N. , 2013). That is, to intrinsically produce patterns of order without resorting to any external control (Camazine et al., 2001). Nevertheless, unlike other complex systems, human societies do not present many of the characteristics that lead them to do so; they do not self-regulate, self-monitor nor self-control. In part, I argue, due to the black box mechanisms that characterises their political decision-making, and the blocks to openness in their interactive decision-making generated by trying to impose patterns of order upon them by means of hierarchical political systems. I believe, however, that the first steps needed to achieve open sociopolitical organisation practices already circulate in daily human life. However, I no longer accept the answer relies exclusively or mostly on open source technologies. I have reached to the unfortunate conclusion that one case is open source being a productive practice of creating software and another one is to assume that this specific field of success would sufficient for it to work on a strictly political context. To my surprise the thought experiment led me to conclude that taking the suggestions of (Rushkoff, 2003) on combining open source and legislative practices could derive in  colonialism practices facilitated by online means, co-optation of the platforms by means of hacking, networks of norms colliding, microwars between kings occupying the same offline territory, co-optation of the platform by a watchful centralised authority, technical costs on entry that lead to polarisation, and a system with too many ad-hoc hierarchies that keep resembling close offline politics. 
From a conceptual point of view, a government that circulates in the hands of everyone, a `creative commons government, is not be a bad idea at all. But it is clear now that this should look for principles outside of the open source software environment and that any pretention of openness should be analysed with a magnifier glass. The language of openness and transparency is extremely suggestive, but the current state of the world hints that when put into practice they can become the opposite. I keep sustaining that individual choice should be a relevant factor in how to organise our societies and that dissatisfaction of service provision should look for answers in processes similar to forking practices. Yet, I still do not know how can this be done in a peaceful, harmonic and self-organised ways avoiding falling into hierarchies or watchful societies. I am even more inclined to support the generation of a dictatorship by a distributed and self-organised artificial intelligence in a commons-based political world with small individual group social practices. Mainly because it can go hand by hand with strong preventions and punishments to animal and child abuse. The question is how to combine both at the same time that we try to avoid negative consequences of full decentralisation by implementing a networked system for decision-making that can hardly be co-opted by groups that seek to use it or them in their own benefit when we try to prevent centralisation and watchfulness. I wonder whether this can be avoided at all. Perhaps the complex nature of human societies means that the capacity to produce emergencies cannot even be fully predicted by the most powerful computational power a network of artificial intelligences could imagine, which would mean that we will never attain a world that is power-free. I expect this not being the case. The question remains open; we live in a truly a privileged moment to re-think governance, power topologies, structures, implications and even the underlining information processing to how we make decisions in society, and that unprecedented sociotechnical transformations will transform our already increasingly interconnected world. 
Although the model presented in this document was just one of the many vias of how internet-based technologies could help open decision-making, the exploration of means was not meant to and probably will never be exhaustive; there will always be room for improvement of some form. I suppose that in reality the possibility for things to go in a wrong direction is always there when it comes to making political decisions that involve humans with personal interests over networks of the commons. But I would like to see in my lifetime, at least, a greater democratization of things that could go wrong. Not in the form of pointless mechanisms of participation such as referendums or voting, but based on a notion of a self-produced organisation arising in a spontaneous way. Tangentially to David Brin´s conclusion (Brin, 1999), I see mainly two roads: either representative democracies evolve into interactive political systems based on heterarchical topologies or we will end up with a global oppressive centralised and watchful government that uses internet-based technologies in its own benefit. 
It is also possible that perhaps this thought experiment on an OSGLS took a pessimistic turn where it should not have and that maybe legislating based on the principles of open source would actually lead us to an enhanced expression of democracy. And, from a conceptual perspective, democracy and anarchy are not mutually exclusive. In fact, “democratic practices might be succeeded by something that is even more democratic and thus even more open” (Tkacz, 2015, p. 36). We could possible end up with a world where internet-based technologies increase the degrees of freedom of living beings on the planet. It is, however, unlikely that the natural self-organisation of social systems solves problems arising from multiplex governments, psychopathic behaviours or centralization of decision-making. Therefore, democracy should give way to a political system with sufficient degrees of freedom, anarchy. Only in anarchies can see the benefits of self-organisation, incompleteness and, above all, interaction. These could be sound teheoretical and practical starting points when engineering bio-inspired political systems (Mezza-Garcia N. , 2013) or any other form of internet-based global distributed artificially intelligent system created with the purpose of harnessing the complexity of human, natural and artificial social systems. And even if open source is not the answer for the problems of sociopolitical self-organisation in the world, the notion of openness continues to be extremely relevant for the future. I insist on the idea that if we want to live in a harmonic world, it might be time to embrace anarchies as a more sophisticated form of democracy. On the other side, as much as I wish governments to have never existed in the first place, I favour a centralised, transparent and watchful global organisation system over the dignity of a biological living being violated. As an anarchist this not a satisfactory conclusion. But I stick with it unless I find a way for lack of mediation to be possible, which I find a hard problem. After all, even in the existence of a platform for direct decision-making, “isn’t the system itself a mediator?” (Tkacz, 2016). To what I reply, as a character in a Socratic dialogue being overwhelmed by the wonders of maieutic… “Indeed, my friend, indeed”…
8    AKNOWLEDGMENTS
I gratefully thank everybody who provided insights and comments during the writing of this document and whose comments in seminars helped clarify the idea: Nathaniel Tkacz and Emma Uprichard, from the Centre for Interdisciplinary Methodologies at the University of Warwick; Gordana Dodig-Crnovic and Jens Altwod from the University of Gothenburg and the participants at the weekly seminar at the Center for Interdisciplinary Research in the Interception of the Concepts Language, Semantics, Cognition, Communication, Information and Interaction (SSKKII) at the same university; Evo Busseniers, Francis Heylighen, Cadell Last and the participants at the weekly seminars of the Global Brain Institute; and Johan Södeberg and Sverker Lunden from Gothenburg University, Adam Netzén from KTH Royal Institute of technology in Sweden, and the rest of participants of the Circle 6 Appropriating Science and Technology for Society at the Nordic Summer University in 2016 in Orivesi, Finland. 
9 References


Bakunin, M. (1970). God and the State. Mineola, N.Y.: Dover Publications.
Barabási, Á.-L., & Albert, R. (1999). Emergence of Scaling in Random Networks. Science, 286, 509-512.
Bearak, M. (2016, July 5). The Iraqi man who took a sledgehammer to Saddam’s statue wants him back. The Washington Post.
Bonabeau, E. (2002). Agent-based modeling: Methods and techniques for simulating human system. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 99, pp. 7280-7287.
Brin, D. (1999). The transparent society: Will technology force us to choose between privacy and freedom? Basic Books.
Brunk, G. (2002). Why do societies collapse? A theory based on self-organized criticality. 14(2), 195-230.
Burgin, M., & Dodig-Crnkovic, G. (2012). From the Closed Universe to an Open World. AISB/IACAP World Congress, (p. 115).
Burton, M. (2010). A Peace Corps for Programmers. In D. Lathrop, & L. E. Ruma, Open Government: Collaboration, Transparency and Participation in Practice (pp. 1-9). Sebastopol, CA: O´Rilley.
Capocci, A., Servedio, V. D., Colaiori, F., Buriol, L. S., Donato, D., Leonardi, S., & Caldarelli, G. (2006). Preferential attachment in the growth of social networks: The internet encyclopedia Wikipedia. Physical Review E, 74(3), 036116.
Castells, M. (2015). Networks of Outrage and Hope. Social Movements in the Internet Age (II ed.). Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Chun, S. A., Shulman, S., Sandoval, R., & Hovy, E. (2010). Government 2.0: Making connections between citizens, data and government, 15(1), 1.
contributors, W. (2016, July 18). Logom. Retrieved August 10, 2016, from Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lagom&oldid=730419129
Council, S. F. (n.d.). San Francisco 311. Retrieved February 24, 2016, from Mobile SF311APP: http://sf311.org/index.aspx?page=797#services
Dahl, R. (1973). Polyarchy: Participation and opposition. Yale University Press.
Dodig-Crnkovic, G., & Burgin, M. (2011). Information and computation: Essays on scientific and philosophical understanding of foundations of information and computation. World Scientific Series in Information Studies.
Eaves, D. (2010). After the Collapse: Open Government and the Future of Civil Service. In D. Latrop, & L. Ruma, Open Government. Collaboration, Transparency and Participation in Practice (pp. 139-151). Sebastopol, CA: O´Rilley.
Eberbach, E., Goldin, D., & Wegner, P. (2004). Turing´s Ideas and Models of Computation. In C. Teuscher (Ed.), Alan Turing: Life and Legacy of a Great Thinker (pp. 159-194). Springer.
Fogel, K. (2005). Producing Open Source Software: How to run a Succesful Free Software Project. Sebástopol, California: O´Rilley Media.
Fogel, K. (2015). Producing Open Source Software. How to Run a Successful Free Software Project. O'Reilly Media, Inc.
Gödel, K. (1962). On formally undecidable propositions of Principia Mathematica and related systems I. (Dover, Ed.)
Giddens, A. (1985). The Nation-State and Violence. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Hancock, T. (2010, 10 05). OpenOffice.org is Dead, Long Live LibreOffice -- or, The Freedom to Fork. Retrieved from Free Software Magazine: http://www.freesoftwaremagazine.com/articles/openoffice_org_dead_long_live_libreoffice
Hancook, T. (2010, October). OpenOffice.org is Dead, Long Live LibreOffice -- or, The Freedom to Fork. Free Software Magazine.
Hayek, F. A. (2012). Law, legislation and liberty: a new statement of the liberal principles of justice and political economy. Routledge.
Heikka, T. (2015). The Rise of the Mediating Citizen: Time, Space, and Citizenship in the Crowdsourcing of Finnish Legislation. Policy & Internet,, 7(3), 268-291.
Heikka, T. (2016, May 16). Interview about his paper on the Finish Equal Marriage Law. (N. Mezza-Garcia, Interviewer)
Heylighen, F. (2008). The emergence of a global brain. In H. APA Masum, & Y. & Benkler, Collective intelligence: Creating a prosperous world at peace (pp. 305-314). Oakton: Earth Intelligence Network.
Heylighen, F. (2016). The Offer Network Protocol: mathematical foundations and a roadmap for the development of a global brain. European Physical Journal - Special Topics.
Hsu, S. (2008, September 22). The Effect of Political Regimes on Inequality, 1963-2002, working Paper, University of Texas. Retrieved September 14, 2012, from http://utip.gov.utexas.edu/papers/utip_53.pdf
Huxley, A. (2008). Brave New World. Ernst Klett Sprachen.
Kant, I. (2014). La Paz Perpetua. Technos.
Kardashev, N. (1964). Transmission of Information by Extraterrestrial Civilizations. Soviet Astronomy, 8, 217.
Keith Sawyer, R. (2005). Social Emergence: Societies as Complex Systems. Cambridge, New Jersey: Cambridge University Press.
Kropotkin, P. (2012). Mutual aid: A factor of evolution. Courier Corporation.
Last, C. (Forthcoming). Offer Networks.
Lathrop, D., & Ruma, L. (2010). Open Government. Collaboration, Transparency and Participation in Practice. . Sebastopol: O´Rillly.
Maldonado, C. E., & Gómez Cruz, N. A. (2011). El Mundo de las Ciencias de la Complejidad. Bogotá: Universidad del Rosario.
Mezza-Garcia. (Forthcoming=?).
Mezza-Garcia, N. (2013). Bio-Inspired Political Systems. In M. Gilbert, Kirkilionis, & G. Nicolis (Ed.), Proceedings of the European Conference on Complex Systems 2012 (pp. 785-812). Springer International Publishing.
Mezza-Garcia, N. (2013). Self-Organized Sociopolitical Interactions as the Best Way to Achieve Organized Patterns in Human Social Systems: Going beyond the Top-Down Control of Classical Political Regimes. Unpublished Undergraduate Thesis. Bogotá: Universidad del Rosario.
Mezza-Garcia, N. (2013). Self-Organized Sociopolitical Interactions as the Best Way to Achieve Organized Patterns in Human Social Systems: Going beyond the Top-Down Control of Classical Political Regimes. Universidad del Rosario. Bogotá: Universidad del Rosario.
Mezza-Garcia, N., & Maldonado, C. E. (2015). Crítica al Control Jerárquico de los Regímenes Políticos: Complejidad y Topología. Revista Desafíos, 27(1), 121-158.
O´Reilly, T. (2010). Government As a Platform. In D. Lathrop, & L. Ruma, Open Government, Transparency and Participation in Practice. Sebastopol, CA.
Onlife-Iniciative. (2015). The Onlife Manifesto. Being Human in the Interconnected Era. Retrieved from European Comission. Digital Single Market. Digital Economy & Society: https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/onlife-manifesto
Partnership, O. G. (2011, Septembet). Open Government Declaration. Retrieved July 5, 2016, from http://www.opengovpartnership.org/about/open-government-declaration
Proudhon, P. J. (1876). What is property?: An inquiry into the principle of right and of government (Vol. 1). BR Tucker.
Raymond, E. S. (1999). The cathedral and the bazaar. . Knowledge, Technology & Policy, 12(3), 23-49.
Reqiao da Cunha, B. (Forthcoming). Patterns of criminal activities inside a deep web's clandestine network.
Rodriguez, M. A. (2007). Smartocracy: Social networks for collective decision making. Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007, (pp. 90-90).
Rushkoff, D. (2003). Open Source Democracy. How online communication is changing offline politics. London: Demos.
Schmidhuber, J. (2015). Deep learning in neural networks: An overview. Neural Networks, 61, 85-117.
Schuler, D. (2010). Online Deliberation and Civic Intelligence. In D. Latrop, L. Ruma, & Eds., Open Government. Collaboration, Transparency, and Participation in Practice. Sebastopol, CA: O´Rilley.
Scott, A. (2013, April 15). THINGS I LEARNED BY SPENDING FIVE THOUSAND YEARS IN AN ALTERNATE UNIVERSE. Retrieved April 29, 2016, from Slate Star Codex: http://slatestarcodex.com/2013/04/15/things-i-learned-by-spending-five-thousand-years-in-an-alternate-universe/
Spaaij, R. (2012). Understanding Lone Wolf Terrorism. Global Patterns, Motivations and Prevention. Dordrecht Heidelberg London New York: Springer. Springerbriefs in Criminology.
Talbi, E. (2009). Metaheuristics: from design to implementation (Vol. 74). John Wiley & Sons.
Tkacz, N. (2010). Wikipedia and the Politics of Mass Collaboration. Platform: Journal of Media and Communication, 2(2), 40-53.
Tkacz, N. (2015). Wikipedia and the Politics of Openess. Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press.
Tkacz, N. (2016). Feedback on the paper. (N. Mezza-Garcia, Interviewer)
Weber, S. (2004). The Success of Open Source. Cambridge, Massachussetts and London, England: Harvard University Press.
Wegner, P. (1998). Interactive Foundations of Computing. Theoretical Computer Science, 192(2), 315-351.




